[ Music ]
>> Lilou: Hello my
juicy co-creators,
Lilou here in Boulder Creek,
California in the middle
of the redwoods at the HeartMath
Institute with you Howard.
I'm very excited to be
interviewing you today.
>> Howard Martin:
Lilou, thank you so much.
I'm glad to have you
here as our guest,
and all the way from France.
This is wonderful.
>> Lilou: Uh huh.
I just can't get enough of
those conversations, you know.
I think it's really inspiring.
It's helping us to thrive.
To really tap into our
potential, and of course,
the heart is at the
center of it all,
and a big conversation to have.
I feel it, but I can't
explain is scientifically,
so I'm very appreciative of
the work that you do here.
Could you, could you summarize
what happens here on the campus?
>> Martin: Sure, well,
we're here at HeartMath,
as you mentioned.
We've been around 23 years now.
And, we're the people that sort
of put together a
new understanding
of heart in a modern context.
You know, heart, we
know about heart.
It's been talked about
for thousands of years.
It's been revered as one
of the most important parts
of humankind, and yet,
somehow it gets sort of lost
in just philosophy and religion.
And, hasn't made it always into
practical living application.
So, what we've done here
at HeartMath all these
years is develop a system,
consisting of methods,
techniques, and even technology,
all underpinned with
modern scientific research.
So, we're the people
that really began
to tell a new story of heart.
And, to do that,
we felt like, okay,
if we don't do it differently,
it will still be what
it's always been;
something that people
see as good.
They see it as sweet.
They see it as nice, but they
don't see it as practical.
>> Lilou: And transformational.
>> Martin: And transformation,
that's right.
So, what we had to
do is we had to look
at how we use modern tools
to begin to give new context
to heart, so that people
can appreciate it more,
and apply it in their life.
We chose science as that bridge.
Our science was never intended
to take the heart out of heart.
We're not trying to make
it sterile or mental,
but we knew it needed
a connection.
So, what our scientists
have done
over these years is really
tell an amazing story,
starting with the
physical heart,
about how it's more
than a blood pump.
It's really an information
processing center in our bodies,
communicating powerful
messages to the brain
and throughout the entire
system, and they've mapped
out how it does all that, and
they've shown very clearly
through published peer
reviewed scientific resource
that it does do a lot
more than pump blood.
Beyond that, we all know
about the spiritual heart.
And, to me, it's that
part of us where spirit;
something that's larger than
our ordinary self begins
to merge with our humanness.
It's that part of
ourselves that allows us
to move beyond our mediocrity.
Gives us the power
to do the things
that sometimes we
think we can't.
It's the source of
our self-security.
It's the source of our wisdom.
It's high speed.
It's intuitive.
It gives us new clarity and new
understanding about ourselves,
about each other,
and about life.
And, one of the thing
that I've learned
about heart all these years,
is that it's really
my own best friend,
and my most reliable guide that
I have to making the decisions,
big ones or small ones, that I
need to make as I navigate life.
>> Lilou: So, of course,
I want to ask you how tap
in this power, and how we
can live a life-centered,
heart-centered life, but
what are some of the,
on the scientific part,
because we hear a lot of the
coherence of the heart, huh?
This is a big one.
>> Martin: It's a term, yeah.
Well, what we found was, and
it wasn't just our research.
This is what was interesting is
that the research
was scattered all
through the research literature.
You know, the story was there,
but nobody had connected the
dots and put it together.
And, what we found
was that the heart
at a physical level communicated
to us in four different ways.
There was a neurological
communication.
This was interesting.
There's a whole field
called neurocardiology.
Who knew? Studying this
very complex nervous system
that we have in the
physical heart.
Next to the brain is
the most complex part
of our nervous system
that we have,
and that little nervous
system communicates
with the big brain here
through a nerve pathway
that starts out in our heart.
It goes up, it comes
in through the brain,
all the way through the
lower brain centers,
in through the midbrain,
where a lot
of our emotional
processing occurs,
and then terminates all the
way here in the neocortex;
higher perceptual
centers of our brain.
And, when researchers map
out the neurological traffic
in our bodies, they see that
the heart is actually sending a
whole lot of more information
than it ever received
from the brain.
So, it's a neurological
communication studies
through a field called
neurocardiology.
The second thing
they discovered is
that we have what's called
the blood pressure wave.
It means that when the heart
squeezes and pushes blood,
it's actually a wave of energy
that's pushing that blood
through the veins
and the arteries,
and it goes through
obviously the whole body.
Blood pressure waves, it
turns out, influence all kinds
of biological function,
including the brain.
The electrical activity in our
brain is actually synchronized
to changes occurring in
this blood pressure wave.
And, that's called a biophysical
form of communication.
The third way is biochemical.
This is another one of those
who knew kind of things.
In 1983, the heart was
actually reclassified
as part of hormonal system.
The reason was is they
discovered it produces several
very, very important hormones.
One of those, for example,
is called atriopeptide.
Atriopeptide has
an interesting job.
It reduces or mediates
the release
of the stress hormone, cortisol.
It produces another hormone,
which many of listeners
and viewers today have probably
heard of called oxytocin,
which has been generically
called the love hormone.
Researches now are seeing
that the heart is probably the
biggest producer of oxytocin
in our body, and that's a
biochemical communication.
So, these first three
ways are interesting,
and they're well-documented,
well-studied,
and I call them hardwired
biological
communication pathways.
The fourth way is where
it gets really cool
and more interesting to me.
It's the energetic heart.
You see, our heart is
actually an electrical organ.
If you or I go to the doctor,
the doctor says I'm going
to do your EKG now
or ECG they call it.
They put electrodes
around our chest,
and they get an electrical
signal
from the electricity being
produced by the heart,
and they determine something
about our physical health.
The heart is by far
the strongest source
of bioelectricity that we
have, 40-60 times more powerful
than the second most powerful
source, which is the brain.
So, this electrical energy
produced by the heart goes
to every single cell
in our body.
Now, here's where
it becomes more fun.
That signal is strong enough, it
creates an electromagnetic field
that goes out about
3-4 feet from the body,
surrounds us in 360 degrees.
Right now, you and
I are interfacing
at an electromagnetic level
from the electromagnetic
fields produced by our heart,
so it's radiates beyond
the skin out into space.
Now, that field changes
all the time.
The electrical energy in
the field will change.
And, you know what's
changing it?
Our emotions.
And what we're feeling
emotionally is determining what
frequencies are in that field.
If we're feeling frustrated
or angry, resentful,
those kind of feelings,
it produces what's called
an incoherent spectra,
chaotic field.
If we're feeling love, care,
compassion, appreciation,
those heart qualities that we've
all heard about our whole life,
the field becomes more
coherent and very ordered.
So, literally,
we are broadcasting this
information all the time
from our heart to every cell
in our body out into space,
and we're interfacing and
interacting with each other.
Now, this.
>> Lilou: So, that means
that information is constantly
being given from heart to heart.
Like right now, beyond the
words, there's something else
that is happening
here between us.
>> Martin: Absolutely there is.
And, when you then, that's
just electromagnetic energy,
which is very reliable
and easy to measure.
When you now begin to look
at it through the lens
of let's say quantum physics,
which removes the barriers
and time and space that
Newtonian physics has.
Then this field becomes
very, very large,
maybe even infinite in a way.
It could be influencing and
connecting with things far,
far beyond our time and
space understanding.
So, it's my belief that
we, that through all
of this communication,
biological, electromagnetic,
all the other energetic fields
that are probably associated
with heart, that's where we are
actually accessing the field
of the consciousness.
Consciousness meaning that
infinite field of information
that we draw from
to create reality,
whatever reality
happens to be for us
through our human filters.
And, it's through heart where
we make that connection.
It's transmitted at
super-high speed to the brain.
The brain has this amazing
information processing center
that we have that
interprets and compares,
and compartmentalizes
things, and so it looks
like the brain is doing it all.
But, my belief is
they work together,
and that the information
from consciousness enters
the biological system
at the level of heart.
>> Lilou: I have a
question regarding that,
because I had the honor to
interview Pim van Lommel,
you know, the cardiologue
that is based in New Zealand
that who have studies and
had many, many heart arrests
in front of him, and yet
those people were able
to experience an NDE, so
how do you explain that?
>> Martin: What's an NDE?
>> Lilou: No, how do you
explain the fact, yeah,
near death experience.
Because most of the people
would say, you know, oh, well,
you can't have an NDE.
You know, there's the heart,
is it created by the brain,
but here you're saying
consciousness is accessed
through the heart, right?
So, I'm wondering how
that works with NDE's.
>> Martin: I don't
know, it's hard to say.
It's a question I've
never been asked before.
I mean that what I was saying
earlier is that, you know,
consciousness enters our
system in a variety of ways.
I think what the heart is
is really a bioreceptor
of intuitive information,
and that's what's happening.
So, in a near-death experience,
when people leave the body,
they go someplace else, they
experience something different.
You know, time becomes
very different.
They can feel like they
were there a long time,
and it's been a matter
of minutes
that they were pronounced
dead, etc. It's just hard
to say how the heart and
brain, either one play
into that particular situation.
I haven't ever studied that,
and I've talked to people
who have had that experience.
So, I know that they've
been very real with me
about what they've
said about it.
>> Lilou: They had that
unconditional love,
and they felt all those.
>> Martin: And they really
didn't want to come back.
It was a service to come back.
It was like, we fear death,
and the ones that I've talked
to have said, you
know, you're there,
and it's really a choice you
make to come back, because it's
so freeing and so magnificent,
that it's beyond the density
that we experience
here on earth.
So, they have to make choices
about even wanting to come back,
and it's usually a
choice of service,
that they recognize
there's more work to do
in assisting this
world and humanity
through a transitional time.
>> Lilou: So, sorry I
stopped in your explanation,
but I got really excited,
because you said this is a way
for us to access
other dimensions,
even our actually consciousness.
>> That's exactly right.
I think that's what's
happening anyway
and the more loving we are
and the more caring we are,
these things, the
more receptive we are.
The more this field is coherent,
and a coherent field
will receive more
of that information.
So, it goes right back to
some basic stuff in life
that we all know that we
just need to practice more.
We need to appreciate all the
things we have in our life.
We need to be more
caring towards other.
We need to be more compassionate
and less judgmental.
We need to have more love.
I mean, I believe the
purpose of life is to love.
I know that sounds simplistic.
I know it sounds philosophical.
Hey, life's tough out there.
You don't understand all
that, but the more I do this,
and the older that I get, the
more I recognize that I believe
that that's the purpose.
Is to love.
It's the universal, you
know, source of creation.
>> Lilou: Fabric
of the universe.
>> Martin: Fabric of the
universe, and our ability
to put more of that out, and
to push past the barriers
and thresholds where
we stop doing it,
where we have the resistances
and the judgments and things.
That's the real work.
The more we do of that, and
that's a heart kind of work
in my opinion, the more we begin
to then receive new information
that allows us to be more aware,
more conscious, more
intelligent.
So, to me, it comes back
to the manifestation
of these heart qualities
in a practical way,
taken out of sentimental
associations,
applied in our daily lives,
and how we make choices
and how we interact with
others is really how we come
into the new intelligence,
that we are coming into anyway,
but that we need to begin the
solve the personal, societal,
and global problems
we have today.
It still comes to accessing
more of the frequency of love.
>> Lilou: And this is something
you think our whole society can
be a heart-based society?
Can we get there?
>> Martin: Yeah,
that's what we do here.
I mean, we're trying to, you
asked the question earlier,
what do we do here at HeartMath?
Well, we're really trying to
create a more heart-based world,
and we do that again
in a variety
of different ways to do that.
And, yes, I think that
part of this era that we're
in now that's been
generically called the shift.
An important part of that is
that heart-directed
living is part
of the evolutionary imperative.
That's not HeartMath
by any means.
It's way bigger than HeartMath.
We've just been pretty good
at putting language around,
some simple tools,
some simple techniques,
some things that people can
then apply in their life
to create this heart-based
world,
but it's much bigger than that.
We call it heart intelligence,
a high-speed intuitive
intelligence that manifests
from our authentic self.
And, as we have more of that,
I think we are moving
that way anyway.
I feel like things are in a
good place within the context
of the evolutionary shift.
It is a dimensional shift.
It's a change in the
consciousness fabric itself.
Our mutual friend, Barbara Marx
Hubbard, calls it a memetic,
change in the memetic code.
A meme is a mass thought
form, so to speak,
that we don't even question,
you know, it's so big.
We don't even see it, it's
so big, like big is better,
you know, those kinds of things.
They're just sort of build
into the psychological
framework that we have.
We don't even challenge them.
They're just there.
But, what she says is just like
the genetic code is changing,
that the memetic code of
consciousness is changing.
I believe she's right
about that.
I think what we are involving
now is a dimensional shift
in consciousness.
It's the biggest shift that
there's been since there's been,
you know, human beings
on the planet.
We're moving from a baseline of
third dimensional consciousness,
which is, I mean, it's
okay, it's separate,
it's good, bad, right and wrong.
It's ambition.
It's survival.
It's those kinds of things,
but look at the beauty
that it's built.
So, it's not to say
that it's all bad.
But, we're moving now
into the fourth dimension,
and where we're trying
to get to,
and we are getting there very
quickly is to the higher ranges
of the fourth dimension.
So, what's happening is we're
really making a dimension
and a half shift over a
very short period of time.
I estimate, you know,
about a hundred years,
that we're in the
middle of it right now.
About a hundred year
little window of time,
we're making this huge
dimensional shift.
Well, that much change happening
so quickly creates a
huge amount of chaos.
We see that.
We see the wars.
We see the social inequity.
We see the economic issues.
We see all those things, and
they're displayed so prominently
to us, and all we have to do
is look at a news site or turn
on the TV, and it's like,
I can't believe this.
You know, we see those
pictures so vividly.
What I think we want to also
recognize is all the other
changes that are happening
that are all the other changes
that are happening that are
really positive and really good,
and that they are happening
very quickly as well.
Millions and millions
and millions of people,
and you know this
just as well as I do,
all around the world are
operating in new states
of awareness and consciousness.
They've developed new
values, new interest,
new ways of living, new
levels of cooperation,
new levels of making an effort
to not separate,
but rather unite.
All those things are
happening all over the planet,
so we are moving to a
more heart-based world.
So, yeah, people
are going to get it.
It doesn't mean everybody will.
You've got to be practical
about these things.
There are people who will
never believe in this.
People that don't
want to live that way.
It's not how they see the world.
It's not their world view.
At the same time, there
are millions and millions
and millions, like I've
said around the world
who are seeing that way.
Not that they're calling
it heart-based world,
but they're manifesting
the qualities of heart.
>> Lilou: Should could there
be actually two different
societies, or like a new
earth on the same earth,
and two different kind of
current, one based on fear,
the other one on love?
>> Martin: I think
it already exists.
>> Lilou: Yeah.
That seems deeper
the bigger it gets.
>> Martin: The polarization
is becoming more obvious.
You know, what I see,
just a visual image of it,
I see a new world birthing
itself in the middle
of the old one, and it's push
out like this as it grows.
And, the old one
is pushing back,
because it doesn't
want to go away.
Where the two meet,
there's friction,
and that friction is
what we see on the news,
but the new one is emerging,
and it can't be stopped.
It's like, this shift
is bigger than us.
It's bigger than humanity.
It's bigger than planet earth.
It's a big, big shift that's
happening throughout the
cosmos really.
So, it's a matter not of if.
It's a matter of how easy
or how hard do we make it.
So, part of what we do here
at HeartMath is provide people
with the skills they
need to make it a kinder,
gentler process, and then
to help others make it a
kinder, gentler process.
Because it's going
to happen anyway.
It's already happening.
It's just a matter of
how rough it's going
to be to get it there.
But, there are two worlds
in a sense operating
in the same place.
I've wondered about that.
When I think about something
like how society operates here
in the western world, and
my values or all the people
that I'm associated
with on base,
and I how people could
have a genocidal war,
let's say in Subsahara Africa,
and the horrific
things that go on there.
Is that the same planet I'm on?
And, I'm not saying
that from a judgment
of those people or anything.
It's just like it's
two different worlds.
I mean to be able
to do those things
to each other is beyond
anything comprehensible in me
or anything around me.
>> Lilou: And it's not the
heart doesn't see it, right?
When you have this heart-based,
heart intelligence,
you see that reality.
You see the suffering,
but how do you.
But, it seems like it gives
actually even more strength.
The heart actually
seems to [noise].
>> Martin: Yeah, well, you
know there's a lower aspect
and higher aspect of heart,
and the lower aspect is
like the different between let's
say compassion and sympathy.
>> Lilou: Yeah.
>> Martin: Sympathy
is oh the poor people,
and it sort of has this
draggy energy to it.
It feels like it's bringing
your down, with all this worry
and concern and everything.
Compassion would
be a higher place
of really having
an understanding
of what these people are
going through; feeling it,
but not being immersed in it.
And, in that higher
compassion, the energetic output
of service is much more potent.
Sympathy has got a draggy
kind of energy to it.
It doesn't have the same
level of effectiveness
that real compassion does.
So, the deeper we
are in our own heart,
the more we make connection
with that heart intelligence
in ourselves, the more
self-secure we are
to be able make choices about
how compassionate we should be
about something,
versus how sympathetic.
Those discriminations are
part of an intelligence
that gives us the ability to see
more into ourselves and to see
into each other, and that's one
of the beautiful
things about heart.
>> Lilou: Um hum, um hum,
and there is this oneness,
because that's a big
conversation, right?
Seeing that we are the
same, yet we are different.
>> Martin: True, it's
allowing for the individuality.
At the same time, it's beginning
to see the commonality.
An example that gets
talked about a lot
in various circles is
we're moving from an era
of competition to an
era of cooperation.
Right? That's said a lot in the
business circles and things, so,
what that means is we're
trying to be less separate.
We're trying to be more
accepting of each other.
Allowing for the uniqueness,
not trying to take that away
from someone or make
them like you.
It's more like, maybe
I'm not like them.
Maybe I don't even agree with
them totally, but I can sort
of appreciate what they are,
maybe how they got there.
Another thing I see breaking
down, this will relate to you
and I right now is
age difference.
It doesn't seem to matter.
You know, what's been exciting
to me in the last say 10 years
or so as I've traveled
around the world,
as I run into these people
that are much younger than me
that never went through all the
various things that I had to go
through to manifest
whatever I have today.
But, they are showing the
behaviors without having gone
through the same stuff, right?
They're younger.
They haven't gone
into all these things.
They haven't read all
these spiritual books
and spent all this time
meditating and all that.
But yet, there's flexibility
and a flow that they have.
There's an awareness and
a brightness about them,
and I recognize that they
didn't get there the same way,
but it's showing up anyway.
China was a good example for me.
You know the people that
I deal with in China,
they're young, they're vibrant.
They don't even know
who Deepak Chopra is.
You know, they haven't
been exposed
to that whole world
and those teachings.
They don't know about all that
stuff, and yet they have a care.
Their attention to me when I'm
there is like extraordinary.
The level of attention
and care and sensitivity
that they manifest that I
can see and feel from them is
so tangible and real, and
I look at that and go,
there's something
else going on here.
It's not what you studied.
It's accessing that field
of consciousness that's changing
what's available to us today,
and again, I'll go back and
you know, repeat myself,
but you access it by
putting out more love.
It's a heart-related connection
that gives us access to them.
>> Lilou: A lot of
the mystics speak
of this special place
in the heart.
Are you able to study that?
What's this thing?
How's it called already?
>> Martin: Well, I'm not sure.
There's so many.
>> Lilou: A little name.
>> Martin: A chamber
for it in the heart
and all that kind of thing.
And, there's been talk about
heart crystals in the heart
and lots of things like that.
Research bears out, you know,
I think what our research
has done has shown
that there's relevance to
those things that were said
in different ways
and different words.
You know, that there is a
special place inside the heart,
and it does communicate.
For instance, you know, there's
been talk about heart crystals.
You know, we already found
that there are crystalline
structures in the brain.
They're calcium-based crystals.
They didn't know
they were there.
They're like little
receptors, and they found now
that they're in the
heart as well.
So, it could be how some
communication is actually at,
and that would relate to
some of the ancient teachings
that talked about this chamber
in the heart with crystals
and things like that, and
that they were trying to put
into their own language
at that time.
And there may be some
biological understanding of that
that emerges that validates it.
But, I think all
that's interesting,
but I think what it comes back
to for me is the
practicality of it.
What are we going to do?
What's going to happen when I
finish this interview if I go
to my office and there's
an E-mail about something
that I feel is not
fair, you know,
something that I
don't think was right?
What's my attitude going to be?
Is that where love stops?
Or is there a pause where
I maintain a certain poise,
a certain ability.
Now necessarily agree
with it, but deal with it
from a little different place
than from an anger reaction
or an unfair reaction.
That's the real game that's
being played right now.
That's more important than to
me what has been said before
or about the mystical stuff.
It's really down to
those kinds of choices.
>> Lilou: Yeah, yeah, year,
because we are stressed in life,
and we do receive
those bad news,
and we have those challenges,
and so what would you do
if you had that E-mail
of that really bad news.
>> Martin: Well, you know,
there are simple things
that we can do, and that's a
lot of the HeartMath techniques.
The things we teach in
our training problems.
The things we teach like in
our heart mastery courses
and things like that.
There are techniques
that we developed
that were intentionally
designed to be simple.
We had to work to make them
simple, and the reason wanted
to make them simple
is we recognize
in the fast-paced
worlds of these times,
people are not going
to spend a lot
of time trying to get somewhere.
So, there's simple
heart focus techniques
to where you just
focus in your heart.
You bring your attention to
the physical area of the heart.
You learn just breath casually
in and out through that area,
but you take it a step further.
As you do that, you make an
effort then to just activate,
as best you can, a
positive emotion.
It may be hard when you're
upset and not easy to do.
A lot of times you can slow
down sort of the vibratory rate
of the mind and emotions
enough to start beginning
to maybe appreciate something
else, like I'm not happy
about this, but tomorrow,
I'm going to TLC.
[laughter] You see
what I'm saying,
you begin to disassociate from
it some, and you begin to put
out more; you find a
place, and you begin to sort
of cultivate yourself back to
that place that feels normal
to you or best to you.
In the beginning it's hard
for people, because they live
so much from here, and they live
from the neck up, and the roar
of ambition and survival's
driving everything they do.
And so, when they begin to
learn HeartMath techniques,
it's like, it feels awkward.
With just a little
bit of practice
as you learn these
things, it reverses.
It feels awkward not to be here,
not to be connected to that.
That feels strange.
That feels out of place.
And, so for me, it's easy.
The road home is a shorter
road than it used to be.
I mean the road back to here.
I never measured my personal
growth around how many,
you know, really got
right all the time.
I measured it, and still
continue to measure it
by how fast I return to being
the Howard Martin I want to be
when I find out that I'm not.
It's the distance;
it's the time it takes.
So, some things that may
have upset me for a week,
maybe only upset me for a day,
or something that upset me
for a day only upsets me
for an hour or something
for an hour, only now a minute.
You know, you learn to shorten
the time, so that there's more
of an ease and flow to life.
>> Lilou: Yeah, that's
beautiful, and because we want
to stay in this place,
because things flow then.
How is that possible,
when we're in that state,
things just flow effortlessly?
We spoke about it a
little bit earlier.
>> Martin: Yeah, our founder,
HeartMath's founders name
is Doc Childre, and he talks
about what he calls
the speed of balance.
About this place inside
where there is more flow,
there's more of a
natural timing.
And he introduced a new
sort of frequency or concept
to us a number of years ago, a
couple years ago, that we teach
in all of our training programs
now, called the state of ease.
E A S E, I better say that
with my southern accent,
nobody will know what I meant.
[laughter] The state of ease.
It's this place inside
that's not just take it easy.
It's like an energy or
a frequency that's part
of the shift, and
it's this place inside
where you can find this
feeling that has more of,
it's like taking the
rough corners off of life.
It has more of that feeling
and naturalness of flow.
It's an ease kind of a thing,
to where you begin to sort
of ease your way
through the stressors.
Not as much resistance.
You begin to find
that it's more liquid.
>> Lilou: Uh huh.
>> Martin: And, you
can return to that.
So, it's an exploration to catch
this frequency so to speak,
this energy, and learn
to what it feels like.
And then learn to recreate it
in the midst of the craziness.
>> Lilou: The athletes and
the supportive know this,
in golf, people know it too.
You have to start; this
is a very important thing
to really have all
your capacities, right?
Is there some studies
done around sports too?
>> Martin: Yeah, absolutely.
We've worked with a lot of
athletes here at HeartMath.
We've worked with all
pop, not all, but many,
many population sectors,
including athletes.
Earlier, I talked about the
four ways the heart communicates
with the brain and
the rest of the body.
When they are working
at optimal state,
we go into a state
called coherence.
There's a medical name for that.
It's called psychophysiological
coherence.
What coherence is
is a highly-ordered
and synchronized state,
where all the body's biological
systems begin to work together.
They all, what's happening
is they're all synchronizing
to the rhythmic beating
pattern of the heart,
which is the master and
the maker in our body.
So, digestion, respiration,
immune system response,
hormonal relations, all those
things begin to then synchronize
and line up with the rhythmic
beating pattern of the heart.
There's a psychological part
of it, because when you're
in the coherent state,
you naturally feel
more positive emotions.
You get to that state by
making an effort to feel them,
but once you're there,
they sort of flow,
and those positive emotions are
the ones we've already talked
about, or I've talked about
and mentioned, like love, care,
appreciation, kindness,
non-judgment,
patience, those kind of things.
So, in the coherent state,
you have this highly-ordered
physiological
and emotional condition
in yourself.
So, everything from reaction
speed time to visual field,
all your sensitivities
are there.
You're more sensitive
to your environment.
to yourself.
You're more sensitive
to what's going on.
You have a greater
ability to choose.
You have a greater ability
to regulate your emotions.
Athletes equate that to
what happens in the zone.
So, the measurement of coherence
is the closest measurement
that we know of to
measuring the zone.
So, we've worked with
professional golfers,
professional football
players, Olympic athletes
of various kinds, gymnasts,
skiers, swimmers, all kinds.
And, they use our technology
and our simple techniques
to find a way to develop
more of that coherence
in themselves naturally,
so that when they're
in athletic performance, it
becomes second nature to them.
Because, they can't think
about all that when they're
in the middle of a football
game, but they can learn to sort
of find that place
inside themselves.
Their baseline of coherence
increases and so some
of those athletes have
had great results.
Golfers, professional golfers
on the PGA tours have
had their scores lowered
and things like that.
And, they make more money
as a result of that,
and they use our
inner balance trainer,
which is the coherence building
technology that we have,
and they practice their
techniques and things like that.
And, it's just one of the
applications for HeartMath is
in helping athletes find
more of that zone state
that they can then use
to improve what they do.
>> Lilou: Yeah, tell us
how this is applicable
to business people.
>> Martin: Gosh, in
all kinds of ways.
>> Lilou: And banker's please.
[laughter]
>> Martin: How about
the lawyers.
That's a judgment, man.
Yeah, we do a lot of in
business, have for years.
You know, training individuals,
coaching executives,
doing large training programs
in Fortune 100 companies.
Today, a lot of organizational
training is actually done
in healthcare in the
United States, in hospitals.
And, there's a lot of
business application for it.
I mean, we have, in our
hospital programs for example,
we've done studies where we have
significantly reduced the amount
of employee turnover, and
we've actually got cost savings
that go against that.
We've actually been able
to show in other studies,
reduction of healthcare
cost to the company
from the employees using
HeartMath, and therefore,
having less health issues
that were stress-related
in the first place.
Executives reported
about the degree
of decision-making
improvement that they have,
as relative to going
through HeartMath training.
So, a lot of business
applications,
and there are changes trying
to occur in business too.
I was just left a call before
I came to your interview
of a whole group of high-level
business professionals
and consultants, that
we formed a small group,
and we're talking now
about change in business,
how we bring more
consciousness into business.
And, so there's a lot of
movement there going on as well
in the business world.
A lot of the business
people feel,
and maybe to some degree I
believe that they're right,
that business is the major
influencer of social change,
so they say if you can
help business change,
you can then help
society change.
And, so, there are lots of
applications in business.
Healthcare certainly with
HeartMath is important.
One area that our nonprofit
works in, it's really important
to our mission is
working with children.
>> Lilou: Yes, I was
going to ask you, yes.
>> Martin: Yeah, we have
programs for children.
We have hundreds of trained
teachers around the country.
I think HeartMath in one form
or another is in something
like 5,000 schools now.
It could be a little
in some places,
bigger in others,
but 5,000 schools.
That's a lot of school.
And, it's to really
help children;
I think the core benefit of it
in the educational setting is
to help them learn more
about their emotions,
and how to use their emotions
in a way that benefits them,
and to help regulate
their emotions.
Because, we're not taught that.
And, yet, we live in a
world today where there's
so much input, and so many
things are hitting us all the
time, and every perception
that we have has an
emotional response to it.
And, you take a young child and
your put them in this world,
and they're exposed to
so many negative things,
and so much stimulation
is going on.
Without a solid emotional
footing, it's very difficult.
It's very confusing for them.
It's very hard for
them to be happy
and to find meaning in life.
So, we feel it's very
important to teach children
about their emotions
and about emotional,
we call it emotional regulation.
And, teach them emotional
regulation skills,
so that that they can
better navigate life.
I mean, it's important
to have the academics
and to learn all that, but I
do think we can do a better job
at teaching children
about things
that are really going even
be more important in terms
of their fulfillment and
success as they grow.
>> Lilou: What are some of the
latest research or applications,
or products, or things
that are coming through?
Because 20 years, huh,
you've been doing this
for 20 years here.
>> Martin: It makes me
sound old, doesn't it?
Do I look that old?
[laughter] Well,
here's the thing.
The research that's going on
now, we've already done so much
on coherence and heart/brain
communication and all that.
We move now into more of an
energetic research modality,
and Roland McCready is
the Director of Research
at HeartMath, and he's doing
studies now on the effects
of consciousness and
energy fields and things
like that on DNA itself.
>> Lilou: Yes.
>> Martin: And, the
changes in DNA confirmation
and what goes on there.
That's one area of study.
Another part of HeartMath,
which is one of the things
that gives me the most joy, is
the global coherence initiative,
and I don't know if
you're aware of that.
>> Lilou: Yeah, I've
heard of it.
>> Martin: What we did is
we created a membership
organization about five years
ago to bring people together
from all around the world to
use our heart-focused care
and our attention to help
shift planetary consciousness,
from the chaos and discord
that we see, to more balance
and cooperation, and
really more enduring peace.
So, it's a membership
that's free.
There are about 50, I think,
3 thousand members now.
They come from over
a hundred countries,
and we do heart-focus things to
put out radiationally, you know,
using heart focus,
care, and intention
into the field environment
to help ease things
in the planetary stressors.
Now, there are thousands
of organizations doing something
similar, and we applaud that.
And, we've never wanted
to be competitive,
or trying to be the big
thing or anything like that.
We just wanted to do our part
in that regard, and so we do.
But, the part that we bring to
that is a little bit different,
is we brought our science to it.
Our scientists have developed
very sensitive technology.
They can measure changes in
the earth's energetic fields.
>> Lilou: Yep.
>> Martin: The earth
produces energetic fields.
Think of them as part of nature.
The part of the earth
as a living system.
There are two primary ones.
One is called the
geomagnetic field.
Most people know what that is.
It's what a compass picks up.
It's the field created by
the spinning by the iron core
at the center of the earth.
It creates an electromagnetic
field around the planet.
The other one is called the
ionosphere, and it's a field
that operates just
above the atmosphere.
It goes about 120 some
miles up into space.
It's less dense than
the geomagnetic field,
and they work together.
And what they do fundamentally
is they provide a protective
layer around the planet.
It protects us from
all the space stuff.
You know, solar radiation,
cosmic rays, all those things,
and without those fields,
we can't have life.
We can't have these
pretty flowers.
We can't have grass.
We can't have you and me.
You know, that would all
go away without the fields.
So, they literally
are part of the earth.
Now, those fields
are always changing,
and they're constantly
in fluctuation.
And research going on for a
long time has definitively shown
that changes in these fields
are creating changes in us,
individually and
societally collectively,
everything from hospital
admissions to health issues
to changes in the stock
market to the acceleration
of creative periods in
society like the Renaissance.
All of those things
have been tracked
to changes occurring
in these fields.
So, it's well-known
now and well-documented
that these fields are relating.
Now, we believe that not only
is that true, we also believe
that mass human consciousness
is impacting those fields,
that we are all radiating
electromagnetically,
something from our hearts,
and that that changes all
the time with our emotions.
And, so our hypothesis is
that mass human emotion,
whether that be positive
or negative,
has a measureable
influence on the geomagnetic
and ionosphere fields.
So, that there's a two way
communication that's going on.
So, what they've done is
that they've developed
a sensing technology.
They are developing a global
monitoring sensor site,
an array of these things
placed around the planet
to study the fields
in their entireties.
A ground base system.
This has never been done before.
Normally, a university
or a government would do
this, and we're doing it.
So, we are, initially,
we'll have 12 sensor sites.
And, they are expensive.
They require installation and
maintenance, and all kinds
of things, but right now we
have four working sensor sites.
There's one here in our
area, in Northern California.
There's one in Northern Canada.
There's one in the UK, and
there's one in Saudi Arabia.
Very soon, the fifth one
is going into New Zealand,
and then soon after
that, a sixth one will be
in South Africa, so they're
being strategically placed.
So, what they're doing is
they're studying the effects
of these fields on us.
They're beginning to provide
more relevant information.
What they found for
example is that the part
of us that's most influenced
by these fields is the heart.
Heart rate variability, which
is the measurement of the beat
to beat changes in the heart.
It's the major thing
that's influenced by chances
in the geomagnetic field.
So, they're discovering
new things
that will help the
research literature.
They will also be
testing the hypothesis
that mass human emotion
is impacting these fields.
There are many people,
some that you know that are
on our boards of this project.
People like Marcy Schaumhoff
[assumed spelling], Greg Braden,
Lynn McTaggert, Jack Hanfield,
and Jack said to me one day,
he said, I think this is
the greatest experiment
in the history of the world.
And, I asked him why he
thought that, and he said,
if this proves to be true,
which you will have shown
through science, is that all
of our thoughts, our prayers,
our meditations, our intentions,
our affirmations are real,
and have a measurable
impact on the earth itself.
He said, that's huge.
That's a paradigm shift.
So, that's what we're up to
with our new science today.
It's that kind of research,
studying the earth's energetic
fields, our relationship
to them, and then the
epigenetic research;
the study of the effect
of air fields on DNA.
>> Lilou: That makes
perfect sense.
It's like we're trees
then, and really,
really part of this
big huge co-creation.
>> Martin: It goes back to
something you said earlier
about the whole connectivity
of everything.
You know, what science
is now showing is
that at energetic levels,
we are all connected.
You know, there is no separation
at the energetic levels.
It's all real, and
we're all connected,
and that's just proving
out to be true now.
>> Lilou: It feels like
when our rhythm slows down
and our heart slows down,
it seems like we're just
at the same beat as mother
earth, you know, and the planet.
Is there such a thing?
>> Martin: I think, yes,
there definitely is,
and I think that's what we're
starting to look at and see,
that there's an energetic
rhythm of the earth.
We can call it mother
earth, you know.
We can call it Gaiam,
you know, Gaiam TV.
We can call it a lot of things,
but I think that's what's going
on is we're learning more
about how this resonances work
and how we interface with that.
If you think about
nature, if you think
about where we're sitting right
now as we do this interview,
there's a naturalness
to this that allows us
to feel differently than
if we were in an airport.
>> Lilou: Oh, yeah.
>> Martin: You know,
doing the same interview.
>> Lilou: Oh, yeah.
>> Martin: There's an influence
that all of these things have,
and there's a connection we
all to the life that comes
through energetically, and
I think that's why people
like nature, is there's
something about mother earth
and nature, and the energetic
frequency that plants
and these things have for us.
That we enjoy so much,
and we want more of.
And, that's certainly
why I live where I live.
>> Lilou: Um hum, um
hum, and it impacts also,
of course, our health.
We didn't speak too much about
that, but our weight also, no?
And, when there is
this coherence,
we also find more
naturally our weight.
I know a lot of French doctors
speak about that, or Canadian.
>> Martin: Yeah, we do
a program that's called
"Stopping Emotional Eating", and
it's about developing coherence,
so that we learn to get to the
emotions that underlie a lot
of the eating issues
that we have,
and we have coaches called
HeartMath One on One Providers
that teach this class.
A lot of them do, and they teach
this class, a lot of them do,
and they teach people,
they coach them on learning
about emotional eating.
We found, research
has already shown
that stress does
create weight gain.
It increases the production
of a hormone called cortisol.
Too much cortisol has a
negative effect on our health.
One of the effects that it
has is it causes excess weight
to build up on waist and hips,
and that's been directly
linked to cortisol.
So, you reduce the stress,
reduce the stress hormones
in some cases, you can see
changes in weight loss.
So, there is a connection
to all those things.
>> Lilou: Yeah, beautiful.
Well, thank you so much for
this delicious interview.
If there is a last thing
you can leave us with,
some last little message for us.
>> Martin: I would like
to give you a message.
What I'd like to say is
this, and I'd like to say it
to everybody who's
viewing right now.
You know, as I think about
where we are today in the shift
and all that we're
going through,
I think there's one thing
that I want people to try
to cultivate more
than anything else,
and that is to please have
compassion for yourself.
Be kind and gentle to yourself.
Recognize you don't
have to push right now.
The shift is happening anyway.
Find the flow with it, and
don't beat up on yourself.
And, when you're down a
little bit, don't lose hope,
don't go into despair.
Recognize that all of us
are doing the best we can.
It's an interesting, but
challenging time to be alive,
so be kind and gentle
with yourself.
Please, please, please,
have compassion to yourself,
and that's what I'd
like to say to everybody
at the end of our interview.
>> Lilou: Thank you, thank
you very much, Howard.
Thank you, this is co-creator
sending you much love.
A beautiful, beautiful
[background music] heart
to heart connection from
HeartMath here in Boulder Creek.
Thank you.